---
layout: post
title: 4.2 Sponsorship
lang: en
lang-ref: ''
permalink: "/en/guide/4-2"
order: 

---
Non-profit organizations often receive sponsorships from businesses to fund their activities. In return, the non-profit organization may provide promotional services to the sponsor or may allow the sponsor the right to use its logo, trade name, or any similar intellectual property.

{% include accordion_example.html
example_text="An organization prints up conference tote bags for delegates with the name of the company that sponsors them. The payments from the corporation are not considered payment for a good or service; therefore, they are not subject to the GST/HST."
%}

{% include accordion_example.html
example_text="You receive funding in return for allowing a corporation the right to use your organization's logo. The corporation uses your logo in its advertising campaign. The payments from the corporation are not considered payment for a good or service; therefore, they are not subject to the GST/HST."
%}
In such cases, CRA does not consider the amount received by the NPO as a payment for goods or services. Sponsorship is therefore deemed not to be a payment for a supply. The GST and the PST therefore do not apply to this transaction.

If however the payment by the sponsor is made primarily (more than 50%) for advertising on television or radio, or in a newspaper, magazine, or other publication issued periodically, the payment received is not payment for a sponsorship, but rather for advertising services. Therefore, the payment is subject to the GST/HST.
